Welcome back.
In our first three modules,
we spent a lot of time talking about
how analytics are accomplished.
We outline the overall process for
how data is generated, captured,
stored, extracted, analyzed, and
driven towards a business action.
However, we haven't spent a lot of time
talking about who actually performs these
operations.
Now hopefully you as a data analyst,
will be doing many of these things.
But there are a lot of other
people involved in creating and
maintaining the data environment
that you rely on to be successful.
In this video we'll outline some of
the most common roles in data and
analytics organization.
Understanding who this people are and
what they do in your organization
will help you both understand
the environment better and
help you to identify the relationships
you'll need to build to be most effective.
Our value chain discussion in
module one assumed that somewhat
linear pathway between
events in the real world and
action in the market place
that's fueled by information.
However, real organizations aren't
constructed around information alone.
It's more likely that your organization
would be organized around functional
groups like marketing or finance,
customer groups like enterprises or
small businesses, or line of business like
a software group versus a hardware group.
Furthermore, there's often some sort of
separation between organizations that
focus on information technology, IT and
organizations that focused on
the customer facing side of the business.
With these different structures and
divisions come people with specialized
skills or knowledge in each group.
This presents a bit of a trade of between
technical skills and contextual acumen.
It's often the case that resources with
more technical skills tend to do the heavy
lifting in the data environment.
While those with more context to do
interpret data and make decisions.
When we think about data and
analytics we find ourselves at
the intersection of these worlds.
We're one part IT, one part business and
we're one part technical and
one part contextual.
However, we can still think about
division of responsibilities
in terms of the outputs that are produced.
Let's outline the major functional
activities that take place in a real data
environment.
Specifically data architecture,
data management, reporting,
Ad-Hoc analysis and modelling.
You'll notice that this
functions are similar but
not exactly the same as the classes of
analytic tools we outlined in module two.
The reason is that here we're focusing
on who does the work not how the work
gets done.
Each of this functions may use multiple
classes of tools to get the job done.
Let's defined each of this functions.
Data architecture refers to the design in
the data environment to meet the need of
the enterprise.
Data management involves
the actual building and
maintenance of the data environment.
Reporting, as we discussed in module two
enables standard periodic renderings of
specific metrics or data relationships.
Ad-hoc analytics broadly refers to
the directed analysis that seek to answer
a specific question, particularly
one that is new or infrequent.
If we find ourselves doing the same thing
repeatedly, we're really doing reporting.
However, there's a natural linkage
between ad-hoc analytics and reporting.
For example, I may seek to answer
a question that's never been asked before.
I'd execute an ad-hoc analysis to do that.
If the analysis reveals
something interesting and
I determine I'd like to see
the result each week or
each month, I'd streamline and automate
the results into a standard report.
Finally, modeling refers to advance
analysis or application of data using
higher order techniques,
including statistical procedures.
Broadly, the three more analytic
functions in this list namely reporting,
ad-hoc analysis and
modeling may be described as data mining.
A term that refers to the process of
extracting useful information from data or
mining insights.
Let's add one more subjective
distinction to this list or
there are always exceptions to the rule.
It turns out that the functions at
the ends of the spectrum tend to rely
a little more on creativity and
design, thinking and problem solving.
Well, those toward the center tend to rely
more on operational and management skills.
Think about of building a house,
the same type of idea applies.
The architecture designs the house and
the interior decorator who finishes it
tend of somewhat more
creative personalities.
The master plumbers,electricians and
carpenters who actually build out
structures and systems in
the house are equally skilled but
more focused on structural repeatability
and robustness of function.
The same things are true
in our data environment.
Now that we've the sense of
the broad functions performed in
the data environment,
let's talk about the specific teams or
roles that support all those function.
We'll start with the more
technical IT centric roles and
move towards more analytical and
business related roles.
Let's start with a couple of
highly technical IT support areas,
one is infrastructure.
Infrastructure teams manage the physical
hardware and connections that exist both
inside the company and
which link to the outside world.
Most of this activity will likely be
transparent to users of the data but
it's critical to the operation
of the data environment.
Another area is system and
application development in administration.
These teams build and maintain systems
that capture information for the business.
They may also provide ancillary
functions like corporate IT
that help to administer software and
other tools.
Both of these types of teams are almost
always located in an IT organization or
an organization devoted
to software development.
There are another set of technical roles
that are more directly associated with
the data environment.
We'll call these technical data management
and business intelligence delivery roles.
The first of these is the data architect.
The data architect is responsible for the
actual design of the data environment and
is usually the person responsible for
structuring the data models
used in enterprise databases for
the data storage and access.
This role is normally found
in an IT organization
either in a data warehousing team or
larger enterprise architecture team.
A second role is that of
the database administrator or DBA.
The DBA is broadly responsible for
the database itself.
Including creation of the database and
maintenance of the database to
ensure stability, accessibility and
efficient performance.
One important role, the DBA can
also play is helping analyst or
other database users to tune
their queries to run efficiently.
This can be really helpful if you
find you're queries are failing or
taking a long time to run.
A third role in this area is that of
the ETL developer, or more generally,
a data integration developer.
As a reminder, ETL stands for extract,
transform and load, or the process of
taking data from one place, manipulating
it and placing it somewhere else.
These developers are largely responsible
for populating a database and
making sure the data is loaded correctly
into the various database structures.
Both DBA's and ETL developers are also
usually located in an IT organization
often within a data warehousing team.
The last role we'll discuss in this
area is the business intelligence or
BI development.
The BI developer sits right on
the boundary of what most organizations
consider an IT function.
This role can take a few
different forms but
generally the BI Developer manages
some of the more technical aspects of
a business intelligence tool
set including maintenance.
And is often responsible for
the technical implementation and
distribution of standard reports.
Let's move onto some rolls more closely
aligned with data manipulation and
analysis.
The first is the database analyst, who
is someone who has the skills to access
the database directly usually
by writing SQL queries, and
who may have the ability to do at
least some analysis on the data.
Some organizations establish a layer
of database analyst between the data
environment and the more contextual
analysts in the business.
Consequently, these roles sometimes
actually exist within an IT organization.
Although best practices increasingly
to locate them with business functions.
A data analyst may or
may not access the database directly, but
usually has enough additional
context about the business to
execute a wide range of analysis
on the data and draw a conclusion.
This is the central role around which
most data analytics functions revolve
in many organizations.
The modeler is a more skilled
extension of the data analyst.
The modeler usually spends most of his or
her time perform predictive and
prescriptive analytics on data
using sophisticated techniques
which is somewhat more advanced
than a basic data analyst role.
Both the data analyst and
the modeler are normally part
of a business side organization,
either a functional team or a cross
functional team dedicated to analytics.
The last role in this area
is a bit different and
is a role that is often misunderstood.
This is the role of the business analyst.
Business analysis is not really
a data analytics function.
It's the process of analyzing
how a business works.
Normally with the goal of identifying
ways in which a process or
business system can be improved.
Sometimes business analysis
incorporates data, but
unlike data analytics it's not
really the core objective.
With these roles in particular,
you might be thinking that
the distinctions are pretty fine,
and that we seem to have spoken to all
these ideas already in the course.
You're exactly right.
Even though this roles have
been separated in the past,
what we're finding is the best
analytic to perform by
individuals who can move
seamlessly across all of them.
They have the technical ability to pull
data like the data base analyst but
they also have the strong context that and
business understanding
of the business analyst.
Not to mention the analytical chops to
accomplish data analytics in modeling.
This idea is actually a pretty nice segue
to the last role we'll discussing this
video, the data scientist.
It turns out, the data scientist is used
to describe a lot of different roles
depending on the organization.
Sometimes it is used as a alternative to
the modeler role we discussed earlier,
especially when the organization
is seeking someone with very deep
knowledge of statistical procedures
like a PhD in statistic.
Increasingly however organizations
are using the term of data scientist to
describe exactly the type of blended role
that blurs the lines between traditional
roles.
This person has a broad
analytical skill set, but
also has a high degree of context.
They also apply scientific approach but
our master communicator's who can
explain how analytical findings
translate to business action.
A consultant and blogger, Brendan Tierney,
has actually put together a nice visual,
describing what the data
scientist is expected to do.
It looks like this.
What you see here is that data
science sits in the middle of
all sorts of different data manipulation
and analysis activities and operates
within a process of driving analytics
understanding to problem solving.
It's actually nice summary of a lot of
the ideas we presented in this course.
Okay, let's quickly recap
what we've covered.
First, we noted that real organizations
are usually organized around functions,
customer groups, or lines of business.
Next, we defined some
broad classes of data
analytics activities
performed in an organization.
Specifically data architecture,
data management, reporting,
ad-hoc analysis and modeling.
We then covered the number of
specific roles that perform one or
more of these functions.
Namely, highly technical IT and
support roles like infrastructure and
application development.
Technical data management and
BI roles including the data architect,
data base administrator,
ETL developer and BI developer.
Data manipulation and analysis roles like
the data base analyst, the data analyst,
the modeler and the business analyst.
And finally,
we discuss the multi-dimensional
role of the data scientist.
Knowing who the players are in your
organization will allow you to better
understand how the analytical
process works, where you are and
who you can go to for information,
advice and assistance.